docs(agentic-orchestration): add agent health and guardrails content (#9450)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/components/agentic-orchestration/agent-states-and-metrics.md

---
id: agent-states-and-metrics
title: Agent states and metrics
description: "Understand the agent state model, state transitions, and the usage metrics Camunda tracks for every agent instance."
keywords: ["agentic ai", "AI agents", "agent state", "usage metrics", "limits"]
---

Understand the agent state model, state transitions, and the usage metrics Camunda tracks for every agent instance.

## About

Every [agent instance](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md) exposes a defined execution state and a set of usage metrics as it runs. Together, they show whether the agent is progressing normally and how close it is to the limits you configured.

In this guide, you will understand the state model, what triggers each transition, and the usage metrics that back the agent's limits.

> For guidance on using these signals to catch an agent going off-rail, see [detect off-rail agents](/components/agentic-orchestration/evaluate-agents/detect-off-rail-agents.md).

Reviewer: 👍 Great introduction!

> ## Agent states

Author: In this PR, we are expanding the content about agent states. A similar table was introduced [here](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/pull/9402/changes#diff-13512f49c1eb2f0394b157b5ee6c88fd8a2b665b2ce5c5fab2a09639521b4c89R134). Let’s keep this one and remove the other to avoid duplication.

Author: Addressed

Camunda updates an agent instance's state as it progresses through its agent loop, fed by status updates from the connector handling the agent.

| State            | Meaning                                                                                                      |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `Initializing`   | The agent instance is being created and set up for a newly activated agent element.                          |
| `Tool discovery` | The agent resolves which BPMN activities and other tool sources are available to it as tools.                |
| `Thinking`       | The agent sends the conversation, system prompt, and tool definitions to the model and waits for a response. |
| `Tool calling`   | Camunda executes the BPMN activities the model selected as tools.                                            |
| `Idle`           | The process instance has moved away from the agent element, so the agent isn't currently working.            |

> | `Completed`      | The parent process instance for the agent completed or terminated.                                           |

Reviewer: :x: Incorrect: Agent instances are completed on the completion/termination of the process instance that they belong to. Not the parent process instance. 

💭 A parent process instance is a process instance that used a Call Activity to call another process instance. The called process instance is typically called the child process instance. A process instance that is not created through a Call Activity but is part of a process instance hierarchy is referred to as the root process instance. 🔧 We should probably add these concepts to the glossary for clarity.

```suggestion
| `Completed`      | The process instance for the agent completed or terminated.                                           |
```

> | `Completed`      | The parent process instance for the agent completed or terminated.                                           |

Reviewer: 🔧 We should probably just align the wording used here to 'Agent states' table in 'agent definitions and agent instances'.

### State transitions

An agent instance follows a predictable path through these states. The following table lists what triggers entry into each state and what happens next.

| State            | Entered when                                                                                             | Moves to                                                                                                                                                   |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `Initializing`   | An agent element is activated and no reusable agent instance exists yet, or a new one is created.        | `Tool discovery`, once the agent instance is set up.                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: ❌ Incorrect: It's a state of the agent instance, so the agent instance must exist for it to have this state.

```suggestion
| `Initializing`   | An agent element is activated and an agent instance is created.        | `Tool discovery`, once the agent instance is set up.                                                                                                       |
```

| `Tool discovery` | The agent instance resolves the tools available to it.                                                   | `Thinking`, once tool definitions are resolved.                                                                                                            |
| `Thinking`       | The agent instance is reasoning over the current conversation.                                           | `Tool calling`, if the model selects one or more tools. `Idle` or `Completed`, if the model returns a final response.                                      |

> | `Tool calling`   | The model selected one or more tools in the previous `Thinking` state.                                   | `Thinking`, once tool results are available. This starts the next loop iteration.                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: As commented below, I'd remove the last sentence here or move this to the `Thinking` row as "completes the current iteration".

> | `Idle`           | The process instance moves away from the agent element, for example, to wait for a user task or message. | `Thinking`, when the process instance re-activates the same agent element and reuses this agent instance. `Completed`, if the process instance ends first. |

Reviewer: @maff Could you have a look at these transitions, as the connector controls these.

| `Completed`      | The parent process instance for the agent completes or terminates.                                       | Terminal state; the agent instance stops updating.                                                                                                         |

> The cycle from `Thinking` to `Tool calling` and back to `Thinking` is one **loop iteration**: the model reasons over the current messages, optionally calls tools, and receives the tool results that become the input for the next loop iteration. An agent instance can run through many loop iterations before reaching a final response.

Reviewer: >The cycle from `Thinking` to `Tool calling` and back to `Thinking` is one **loop iteration**

@maff I think this is not entirely true. Could you have a look?

Reviewer 2: Technically every iteration ends after the transition from thinking to something else, correct? 🤔 Not sure if it's helpful if we describe it that way - do we need to cover this in detail?

Author: Okay, I’m dropping the sentence since we’re already introducing the concept in the other PR #9402.

## Usage metrics and limits

> Alongside its state, Camunda tracks usage metrics for every agent instance so you can measure cost and activity, and enforces a configurable limit on how many times an agent can call the model.

Reviewer: >enforces a configurable limit on how many times an agent can call the model.

This is also something controlled by the connector, so I'm not sure of the current behavior. @maff Can you confirm that all limits are actually enforced by the connector?

Reviewer 2: We currently only enforce the max model calls limit. Others, like max tokens, were discussed, but not planned yet. So from that perspective the statement is correct.

Is this page meant to be generic to the agent instance history API or does it reflect the behavior of our AI Agent connector? While the statement is true for the OOTB experience, it's not "Camunda" enforcing these limits, so it could lead to developers building a custom agent to expect this to be raised automatically by the engine. We already have docs on the AI Agent behavior, so maybe we could drop this here?

Author: I have rephrased the sentence.

The guide is intended to be generic and independent of the implementation. I thought these features were now available for every agent implementation, so please @maff @korthout confirm that this section is still accurate. Otherwise, I agree with Mathias that all of this should be documented in the connector docs.

Reviewer: @afgambin The limits are only enforced by the connector. The new agent instance and its metrics/limit are just a way to visualize it. It is not active enforced by the engine or so. So, let's remove the parts that are actually connector specific.

Author: I’ve removed the subsection from the States and metrics page and kept the link to the dedicated connector docs in the Detect off-rail guide.

---
id: agent-states-and-metrics
title: Agent states and metrics
description: "Understand the agent state model, state transitions, and the usage metrics Camunda tracks for every agent instance."
keywords: ["agentic ai", "AI agents", "agent state", "usage metrics", "limits"]
---

Understand the agent state model, state transitions, and the usage metrics Camunda tracks for every agent instance.

## About

Every [agent instance](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md) exposes a defined execution state and a set of usage metrics as it runs. Together, they show whether the agent is progressing normally and how close it is to the limits you configured.

In this guide, you will understand the state model, what triggers each transition, and the usage metrics that back the agent's limits.

For guidance on using these signals to catch an agent going off-rail, see [detect off-rail agents](/components/agentic-orchestration/evaluate-agents/detect-off-rail-agents.md).

## Agent states

> Camunda updates an agent instance's state as it progresses through its feedback loop, fed by status updates from the connector handling the agent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Camunda updates an agent instance's state as it progresses through its loop, fed by status updates from the connector handling the agent.
```

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/camunda/product-development/blob/main/strategy/decisions/2026-06-23-agent-terminology-model.md#the-agent-loop

| State            | Meaning                                                                                                      |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `Initializing`   | The agent instance is being created and set up for a newly activated agent element.                          |
| `Tool discovery` | The agent resolves which BPMN activities and other tool sources are available to it as tools.                |
| `Thinking`       | The agent sends the conversation, system prompt, and tool definitions to the model and waits for a response. |
| `Tool calling`   | Camunda executes the BPMN activities the model selected as tools.                                            |
| `Idle`           | The process instance has moved away from the agent element, so the agent isn't currently working.            |

> | `Completed`      | The process instance that hosted the agent completed or terminated.                                          |

Reviewer 3: `hosted` sounds a bit off in this context. Maybe the parent instance?

Author: Rephrased

| `Tool discovery` | The agent instance resolves the tools available to it.                                                   | `Thinking`, once tool definitions are resolved.                                                                                                            |
| `Thinking`       | The agent instance is reasoning over the current conversation.                                           | `Tool calling`, if the model selects one or more tools. `Idle` or `Completed`, if the model returns a final response.                                      |
| `Tool calling`   | The model selected one or more tools in the previous `Thinking` state.                                   | `Thinking`, once tool results are available. This starts the next loop.                                                                                    |
| `Idle`           | The process instance moves away from the agent element, for example, to wait for a user task or message. | `Thinking`, when the process instance re-activates the same agent element and reuses this agent instance. `Completed`, if the process instance ends first. |

> | `Completed`      | The process instance that hosted the agent completes or terminates.                                      | Terminal state; the agent instance stops updating.                                                                                                         |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `Completed`      | The parent process instance for the agent completes or terminates.                                      | Terminal state; the agent instance stops updating.                                                                                                         |
```

> The cycle from `Thinking` to `Tool calling` and back to `Thinking` is one **loop**: the model reasons over the current messages, optionally calls tools, and receives the tool results that become the input for the next loop. An agent instance can run through many loops before reaching a final response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The cycle from `Thinking` to `Tool calling` and back to `Thinking` is one **loop iteration**: the model reasons over the current messages, optionally calls tools, and receives the tool results that become the input for the next loop iteration. An agent instance can run through many loop iterations before reaching a final response.
```

## Usage metrics and limits

Alongside its state, Camunda tracks usage metrics for every agent instance so you can measure cost and activity, and enforces a configurable limit on how many times an agent can call the model.

### Token consumption

> Camunda tracks the number of tokens consumed by the agent's model calls. Token consumption accumulates as the conversation grows: every loop adds the previous tool results and the model's reasoning to the context that's sent with the next model call, so token usage tends to climb with each additional loop.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Camunda tracks the number of tokens consumed by the agent's model calls. Token consumption accumulates as the conversation grows: every loop iteration adds the previous tool results and the model's reasoning to the context that's sent with the next model call, so token usage tends to climb with each additional loop iteration.
```

Rising token consumption without a final response is a signal that the conversation is growing without converging on an outcome. Token usage is also a direct driver of the LLM provider cost for the agent's execution. See [context window size](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess.md#memory) for how conversation length is capped independently of token count.

### Tool call count

> Camunda counts the number of tool calls the agent instance has made across all loops. A climbing tool call count generally reflects active work, but a count that climbs while the agent calls the same tool repeatedly with similar or identical inputs can indicate the agent is stuck rather than progressing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Camunda counts the number of tool calls the agent instance has made across all loop iterations. A climbing tool call count generally reflects active work, but a count that climbs while the agent calls the same tool repeatedly with similar or identical inputs can indicate the agent is stuck rather than progressing.
```

### Model call duration

Camunda records the duration of each model call in the agent's conversation history. A model call that takes far longer than comparable ones is a sign the agent isn't progressing normally. This duration is surfaced per model call, not for tool results.

Tool execution duration is not part of the conversation history metrics. When a tool is a BPMN element, you can see how long its execution took from the usual element instance details in the details tab for that tool activation.

### Model call limit

The **Maximum model calls** setting is the primary limit against runaway loops and unexpected cost. It limits how many times an agent instance can call the model, and defaults to 10 if you don't configure it.

> Camunda tracks model calls made against this configured limit, so you can see how close an agent instance is to it before it's reached. When an agent instance reaches its configured limit, the AI Agent connector throws a `MAXIMUM_NUMBER_OF_MODEL_CALLS_REACHED` error.

Reviewer 2: 💭 Is this page related to the AI Agent connector or around the metrics tracking in general? I feel we try to keep it rather generic at the top, but shift to AI Agent connector specifics here. Should we make that split more clear? 

If we keep the error code reference, we could link to the table of available errors: https://docs.camunda.io/docs/next/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess/#error-handling

Author: The idea is to have an implementation-agnostic guide, with implementation-specific details where useful or necessary. I’ve reworked the section accordingly and also added that link.

---
id: agent-health-and-guardrails
title: Agent health and guardrails
description: "Understand the agent state model, state transitions, and the usage metrics Camunda tracks for every agent instance."
keywords:
  ["agentic ai", "AI agents", "agent health", "guardrails", "agent state"]
---

Understand the agent state model, state transitions, and the usage metrics Camunda tracks for every agent instance.

## About

Every [agent instance](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md) exposes a defined execution state and a set of usage metrics as it runs. Together, they show whether the agent is progressing normally and how close it is to the limits you configured. This page describes the state model, what triggers each transition, and the usage metrics that back the agent's guardrails.

For guidance on using these signals to catch an agent going off-rail, see [detect off-rail agents](/components/agentic-orchestration/evaluate-agents/detect-off-rail-agents.md).

## Agent states

> Camunda updates an agent instance's state as it progresses through its feedback loop, fed by status updates from the connector handling the agent.

Reviewer 4: 💭 "feedback loop" or "agent loop"? Is "feedback loop" the intended product terminology? 🤔

Author: @aleksander-dytko thoughts?

Reviewer 2: "feedback loop" is what we've been using the AI Agent connector concepts: https://docs.camunda.io/docs/next/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent/#feedback-loop

Author: I think we’re looking for "agent loop" here, based on the canonical terminology: https://github.com/camunda/product-development/blob/main/strategy/decisions/2026-06-23-agent-terminology-model.md#the-agent-loop.

Author: I’ve filed [this issue](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/issues/9494) to ensure the AO docs are aligned with the recently-defined product terminology, including assessing the "feedback loop" concept that Mathias mentions in the connector docs.

### Token consumption

Camunda tracks the number of tokens consumed by the agent's model calls. Token consumption accumulates as the conversation grows: every loop adds the previous tool results and the model's reasoning to the context that's sent with the next model call, so token usage tends to climb with each additional loop.

Rising token consumption without a final response is a signal that the conversation is growing without converging on an outcome. Token usage is also a direct driver of the LLM provider cost for the agent's execution. See [context window size](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess.md#memory) for how conversation length is capped independently of token count.

### Tool call count

Camunda counts the number of tool calls the agent instance has made across all loops. A climbing tool call count generally reflects active work, but a count that climbs while the agent calls the same tool repeatedly with similar or identical inputs can indicate the agent is stuck rather than progressing.

### Execution duration

> Camunda tracks how long the agent instance has been active, both across its full run and in its current state. A model or tool call that takes far longer than comparable calls, without a change in state, is a sign the agent isn't progressing normally.

Reviewer 4: 💭 As far as I am aware, we only track and show the duration for model calls (`ASSISTANT` messages) in the conversation history. For `TOOL_RESULT` we do not surface this metric. However, if a tool is a BPMN element, the tool execution duration is visible through the usual element instance details in the details tab for the tool activation.

**Aside:** @maff @korthout Are we able to surface tool execution durations in the conversation history as well? Since we introduced granular metrics (e.g. only `duration`) for conversation history items, the API can support it. But does the connector know this information and is able to provide it?

Author: Thanks, corrected. Renamed the section to **Model call duration** and reworked it to state that duration is surfaced per model call in the conversation history (not for tool results), and that tool execution duration for a BPMN-element tool is instead visible via the element instance details in the details tab for that tool activation. Fixed in the latest commit.

Author: Updated in this commit https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/pull/9450/changes/311cec925ffdbb82aa85589b5ebdb026b3675fe8
